Eoin: Regular listeners know that we are big fans of
Fargate for running containers on AWS.
Anytime that AWS gives us a nice way of doing
less configuration, getting up and running
quickly and reliably, we grab the opportunity.
Of course, there's always a trade-off when you
cede control to a cloud provider, and Fargate is
not without its limitations.
You don't get to use GPUs, you can't control
network bandwidth, and you don't have a large
number of storage options
That means you sometimes need to jump back to
ECS on EC2.
And then you have to take on the extra work
in configuring and securing and keeping those
instances running.
We now have the brand new ECS-MI managed
instances support.
And this could be the best of both worlds
promising control over storage, networking and
GPU support with the low management you get with
Fargate.
We've spent a good bit of time evaluating
ECS-MI.
And we wanted to share with you what we think.
and we'll cover GPU support, cost factors,
scaling, performance.
You'll also hear from us what kind of use cases
and workloads are best suited to ECS-MI.
So let's dive in.
I'm Eoin, I'm back with Luciano for the latest
episode of AWS Bites.
AWS Bites is brought to you by 4Theorem,
and we'll find out more about 4Theorem at the
end of the show.
Choosing something to run your containers is
always a trade-off between simplicity and cost
and control.
We've talked about it a lot before,
and we've mentioned the simplicity of AppRunner
and Fargate, which we both like.
And with both of those options, you don't ever
really need to think about the underlying EC2
instances that AWS completely hides from you.
ECS on EC2 lets you run tasks on a huge
range of instances, but you need to pick the
AMI, configure the EC2 correctly, ensure it has
the ECS agent,
all that stuff and ensure that the instances are
scaling in tandem with ECS tasks.
So Luciano, what is this ECS-MI and where does
it fit?
Luciano: So yeah, basically when you say I need to run
a container, there is always a hidden
requirement baked in, which is
you need somewhere a machine that runs that
container.
And that means thinking about CPU,
memory, networking, storage, sometimes even
GPUs, as we'll see in the next few minutes.
So the real question is, how much of that stuff
do you want to care about?
How much work do you want to put into managing
all of that infrastructure?
And when it comes to ECS, typically it's a
spectrum, and you have two contrasting options.
On one side, you have Fargate.
And Eoin, as you put it really well in the
introduction, Fargate is almost like the
serverless option of containers, if you want to
call it like that, where basically you only
worry about your application code.
You define the task as a container that runs
your application.
And then whatever is the underlying
infrastructure, AWS manages all of that and
actually hides all of that complexity.
This is great when you need to move fast and
when you don't have really advanced requirements
in terms of the underlying infrastructure,
which is probably most of the use cases.
So I think for most people using Fargate,
it's probably a good win.
A caveat, maybe if you need something like a
GPU.
And in that case, we need to look into the
other end of the spectrum, which when looking at
ECS is basically you
use ECS with EC2 instances, which means when you
create a cluster you need to provision your own
EC2 instances, which suddenly means you need to
pick the right instances, you need to decide
which operative system are you going to use,
you need to make sure you provision all the
right software and libraries,
you keep the operative system up to date and so
on.
So you are on to AMIs, launch templates,
autoscaling groups, patching, maintenance,
all that kind of stuff which for some people can
be very joyful but I think for other people
could be very daunting and time-consuming.
So
In a sense we would say the ECS managed
instances in this spectrum is something that
stands in the middle and it tries to give you
the best of both worlds.
And so with this third option basically you keep
the flexibility of EC2 but without that
management burden.
So in practice what this means is that
You still need to define somehow what kind of
compute power you need, but rather than actually
picking the instances and the operative system
and creating AMIs and so on, you just define a
list of requirements and give it to AWS.
And then AWS is going to try to select the
best machine that fits that list of requirements
and just spin it up for you.
You don't even know which operative system is
running.
Technically, you know, we can tell you it's
Amazon Bottlerocket, but in practice,
it doesn't matter because you're not managing
that and you cannot even log in into the
machine.
So you kind of get a Fargate-like experience
where you know there is a machine that is
running your container.
You don't get to see much of that machine.
the advantage compared to Fargate is that you
have much more control in expressing the
requirements for the underlying infrastructure.
So today we are going to be spending a little
bit more time giving you the details of what we
learned by exploring this new option that you
have in ECS, but I think we should start by
talking about costs because I think there are
some important nuances there that we need to
clarify up front.
Eoin: Yeah, I think so.
We normally talk about cost at the end,
but since it's such a big aspect of the pitch
around ECS managed instances, let's give the
lowdown now.
The pricing model itself is reasonably
straightforward.
You're paying for the underlying EC2,
right?
So you pay the normal EC2 per second pricing for
the instances.
And that includes the normal benefits you would
get with compute savings plans or reserved
instances, et cetera, if you have those enabled.
And this is a big part of the cost calculation
with ECS-MI that you can use reserved instances.
It's not an option you have with Fargate.
Now, the important other point is that there is
a management fee on top of that EC2 pricing.
So AWS provides a separate ECS managed instances
price list of the fees per instance type on the
pricing page.
So you have to look at each instance type,
but we just did a calculation of like analysis
of all the data against the all the EC2 instance
pricing.
And it seems like it's 12% is the management fee
overhead.
and that's based on the on-demand instance
price.
So, in some cases, that might be fine.
You can accept, I think, as much as we all
hate giving money to AWS, if they're doing a
little bit more work and investing in
infrastructure to lower your total cost of
ownership and reduce the maintenance effort,
the management fee might seem fair.
But on the other hand, it does kind of challenge
the claim that ECS-MI is a more cost-effective
approach.
If you're benefiting from compute savings plans
or reserved instances,
you're still gonna pay 12% of the on-demand cost
for the managed instances.
So you would need to do that calculation and
figure out what works out for you.
But do bear in mind the total cost of ownership
and the time you'll save, because that's not
trivial.
There is one more bit of bad news.
At least as of today, ECS-MI does not support
spot instances.
Now with ECS on EC2 and ECS on Fargate,
you have a spot option.
ECS-MI, right now, you don't.
So that's a pity, especially since we thought
we'd be able to use this to get really,
really cheap.
infrastructure, but that's not really the case.
That's the key caveat, right?
It's not automatically true that ECS-MI will
save you money.
Depending on your workload, how much you benefit
from Spot today, how mature your existing ECS on
EC2 setup is, you may already still come out
ahead running your own EC2 capacity,
especially if you've invested time in
rightsizing, scaling policies, AMI pipelines,
operational playbooks, all of that,
and you've got your compute savings plans,
reserved instances, all of that already sorted.
ECS-MI is essentially trading some control and a
margin on top of on-demand pricing for reduced
operational work.
And whether that trade is worth it,
it really depends on your story and your
constraints.
The only honest answer here is to benchmark it
against your workload and your current costs.
I'm afraid we can't do that for you.
But we did do some work.
So do we want to talk about our story and
how we evaluated ECS-MI?
Luciano, do you want to talk about how we got
started and how people will get started?
Luciano: Yeah, I think it's a good idea,
but maybe before we actually get into that,
I think it's useful to give some plain English
definitions for the necessary terminology that
you're going to encounter when dealing with ECS
and especially managed instances.
Because yeah, if you haven't used ECS in a
while, I think there is a lot of terminology
that is not necessarily obvious.
So I always get confused myself.
So I think it's just a good refresher.
So let's start with cluster.
So with cluster, you can say it's basically like
a logical home for your ECS workloads.
It's basically where you define tasks that can
run.
And effectively, underneath a cluster,
you have basically servers that are powering all
of that machinery.
Then we have task definition.
So a task definition, you can think of it like
a blueprint for container workloads,
which doesn't just contain a container image,
but it also contains the specifications such as
how much CPU do you need, memory,
maybe environment variables, networking
configuration, and so on.
Then you have a task.
as opposed to task definition.
So task definition is the blueprint,
while a task is actually a running copy of that
task definition.
So it's almost like you have an instance that is
running for that specific task definition.
And as you might have one task definition,
you might have multiple tasks that use the same
definition to basically distribute that
workload.
Eoin: Then you have
Luciano: the concept of service, which is also a bit
confusing, because sometimes I find that it
feels almost the same as a task definition,
but actually is
bit more in the sense that it's almost like what
keeps the tasks running.
So the task definition gives you the blueprint,
the task is the actual instance running,
but a service is basically where you specify how
many tasks do you want and what are the
conditions for which these tasks should run.
So that includes, for instance,
deployments, like for instance, if you're going
from version 1 to version 2, how you do roll
out those version changes, or maybe
auto-scaling, like if you have specific
requirements where, I don't know, maybe
depending on traffic or maybe depending on work
available in a queue, you might want to scale
things up and down, you define all of that stuff
in the service definition.
Then we have capacity provider, and basically
capacity provider bridges the gap between ECS
and where compute comes from.
So that can be, for instance, ECS is more like
a service that manages container if you want,
and you can think of it as it's abstracting the
underlying
Infrastructure.
So when you work with capacity providers,
you actually say, okay, what kind of
abstraction.
Do you want to use and that can be far
get in the case of a more serverless option.
It can be EC2 with auto scaling groups or EC2
with managed instances.
For managed instances, the capacity provider is
basically where you have to describe what kind
of instances are acceptable using something
called attributes.
And there are generally two options.
One is the default capacity provider,
which is pretty much automatic.
So it tries to select the most cost optimized
general purpose instances for your workload
requirements.
Or you can also use custom capacity providers,
where you have more control in specifying those
attributes
which are things like the vCPU count,
memory, CPU manufacturers.
If you need any accelerator, which is not just
GPUs, you can even use, I think,
like TPUs and FPGAs as well.
So yeah, basically this covers also what an
attribute is.
It's basically a list of desirable features of
your underlying infrastructure.
And you can even get more specific,
like technically you don't want to hard code the
instance types, but you can even define a subset
of instance types that are acceptable if you
want, or as we say, the kind of CPU that
they need.
Or maybe if you want burstable performance or
bare metal instances,
So it can get pretty granular and you can
imagine like a big filtering query across all
the possible available instances in AWS,
just trying to select the best one in terms of
cost effectively is the best one, but also
matching all the requirements that you are
providing.
So hopefully that's a good introduction before
we start to talk about what are the things that
you need to do step by step to get to
a running deployment using ECS managed
instances.
Eoin: Okay, we try and go through the list of steps
then as comprehensively as we can.
I mean, it starts with an ECS cluster like you
might have used before, you may already have one
that you can use.
So you'll need your VPC, you need to create your
cluster or use one if you've got one already.
And then managed instances need IAM roles.
One is going to be the instance profile role,
which is the same as you always have with EC2.
And then you've got an infrastructure role,
which is the one that ECS-MI will use to launch
your instances and pass that other role to the
instance itself.
You need a security group, of course.
And then you get into the real MI specific
stuff, like the capacity provider Luciano was
already explaining very well.
You can start with the default capacity provider
and ECS will just pick the capacity for you.
Or if you want to specify those instance
attributes,
like vCPU and memory, CPU manufacturer,
accelerators, storage, networking.
It's basically like, it's a bit like SQL,
right?
You're just providing a list of filters for all
of the instance types that are supported by
ECS-MI.
Then you attach your capacity providers to the
cluster, and you're ready to start thinking
about tasks and containers.
So you publish your container image to ECR and
define a task definition.
One thing is that
In your task definition, you should specify
managed instances compatibility.
There's a new value for that.
And then you can add your containers,
your environment variables, logging,
et cetera.
And if you need GPUs in your container,
that's also something you need to specify with
the GPU count resource attribute in your
container as well.
Then you will set up your task role as normal
to give the actual task its permissions.
and you can create an ECS service.
You don't absolutely have to create an ECS
service.
You can always just run tasks directly in the
cluster.
ECS services are what I think 95% of workloads
are using because they will scale for you and
have other features.
So you will set the capacity provider strategies
on your service to the managed instances,
capacity provider name, and then you may want to
set a desired count or let the service scale
that for you.
And an interesting point when we're talking
about CDK is that if you're using managed
instances, you're still using the Fargate
service level two construct, which is a bit
confusing.
But that's the way it is right now.
There's official examples from AWS using that.
And our own example we'll share later does the
same.
We'll talk about that in a bit.
If you want auto scaling, you can also add your
deployment auto scaling in the ECS service too.
And then you will scale your sorry,
you will deploy the stack
trigger your workload, and based on your scaling
configuration, you should see tasks starting in
ECS, managed EC2 instances starting,
and they'll appear in your ECS console under
infrastructure, but also in the EC2 console.
So that's roughly the list of steps you need to
get going.
Luciano, do you want to talk a bit more about
that CDK support?
And maybe we'll talk about the code example we
have as well, because there's not a lot out
there and we thought we'd try and add some
examples that people might use as a basis for
their own.
Luciano: Yes, so we are going to make available this
template or example, if you want to call it like
that, which uses CDK to provision an application
running on ECS managed instances.
And
Eoin: yeah, this is
Luciano: just our honest attempt at providing an example.
It might not be the best one going forward
because we just tried to build it from scratch.
We didn't really find a huge amount of reference
or examples out there.
So hopefully this is our first good attempt.
But we're definitely going to rely on the rest
of the community to improve it or provide other
examples as well.
So what do we do in this template?
So we make a little bit of an assumption,
which is not necessarily what you might want to
do, but it's one use case.
And the use case is basically you have a
workload that needs GPU
and this workload runs based on tasks that are
available on a queue.
So it automatically scales to zero if there is
nothing in the queue, you have nothing running.
If you drop messages in the queue,
it will spin up all the necessary infrastructure
until it processes everything from the queue and
then shuts down.
all the infrastructure again.
And we actually provide two examples.
So there is almost like a vanilla container that
the only code you will find, it's Python code by
the way, is just pulling from the queue and then
just telling you, this is the message,
do whatever you want with it.
And then we have a little bit of a more
realistic example.
So the first one is almost like a template.
You can put whatever business logic you need
inside of the container and deploy it.
While the second one, it's a realistic example
where we use OpenAI Whisper to transcribe a
podcast audio that is coming from S3.
You might remember we have talked about our
current solution to transcribe this very
podcast.
that is using SageMaker today, so maybe
eventually this is going to become a replacement
if we see that there is an improvement in terms
of pricing and or performance.
We haven't done all the maths yet to decide
whether this is the solution we want to go,
but technically we could prove that this
solution works, so it might be an alternative.
So I think it's important to mention what did we
learn while writing all this CDK code.
It's not huge.
I think it's a file with just a couple of
hundreds of lines of code.
And yeah, already Eoin mentioned the limitation
that you have to use this Fargate service,
which is a little bit counterintuitive.
It looks like you're doing something wrong
because we already mentioned today that Fargate
is a different way of using ECS.
I think it's just that the team hasn't created a
more specific construct just to be able to work
with managed instances.
So Fargate is probably the best approximation
you get so far, but it doesn't just get
confusing because of the name.
It gets confusing also because you will have
attributes that are available to you
But then those attributes don't really do
anything useful.
And this is something that misled us into
thinking that you could use spot instances,
for example, because there is a very long
attribute that is called something like max spot
price as percentage of optimal on-demand price,
something like that.
that basically makes you think, okay,
this is a way for me to be able to
select spot instances.
And we spend hours just trying to figure out
what was the right configuration to get a spot
instance, only to eventually find out that this
attribute is ignored.
And there is no way, at least today,
that you can get a spot instance.
So this is another side effect of having this
Fargate service construct, which is,
again, just an approximation.
you get probably more than what you actually
need and it's just confusing.
And then again, we already mentioned there is a
little bit of a lack of documentation and proper
examples, but we are confident this is just
something that is going to improve.
It's a new service and it's probably normal that
there isn't a lot out there yet.
So hopefully we can help a little with this one
example, but yeah, we look forward to seeing
more examples from the rest of the community.
So what do you think is that of the GPU
support?
Because this was, I think, a big component in
our tests.
Eoin: Yeah.
I think you've asked publicly on the podcast
many times for AWS to add GPU support to
Fargate.
It was on your wishlist.
And
Luciano: Lambda.
Eoin: Oh yeah?
Okay.
Good luck with that.
But look, it did work with GPUs.
We were able to use it for the podcast case.
I mean, I think we did share our frustrations
with SageMaker batch transforms in the past,
which we use for the podcast.
It works, and it has worked very reliably since
we started using it with Whisper to do the
transcription.
But the overall process takes about 30 minutes,
and the majority of that is just overhead while
we wait for SageMaker to get a container up and
running.
So we were looking for other options,
and this worked reasonably well, I think we can
say.
You can select a number of GPU accelerators your
task requires, which is good.
I'm sure these days people will have lots of use
cases in mind.
But also bear in mind that you may need to
request a quota increase because GPUs don't just
become available automatically on your account.
They want to protect you from bill shock by
making you ask explicitly for the really
expensive instance types.
GPUs typically belong to that category.
So make sure you get the service quotas in
quickly if you want to launch ECS-MI production
next week.
Now, that's GPU support.
Should we talk about where ECS-MI fits for use
cases, Luciano?
Luciano: Yes.
So if you have reserved instances or capacity
reservation and you want to combine the benefits
of using those things with the ease of
management of ECS, I think using managed
instances, it's a good idea.
And basically, you get something that is close
to Fargate in terms of experience,
but with a lot more control on the underlying
hardware.
So for instance, you can enable GPUs this way,
which was our main use case.
Another thing that might be really useful is,
for instance, when you need fine-grained control
over storage and networking.
maybe because you are doing something that
requires very specific performance or very
specific characteristics in either the storage
or the networking layer.
But if we want to provide some more practical
examples, what we did was basically a low volume
AI workload that required GPU.
In our case, it was audio transcriptions,
but you can imagine something like,
I don't know, you have a bucket,
S3 bucket full of pictures, and you want to come
up with, I don't know, automatically labeling
all these pictures or maybe creating captions,
that kind of stuff.
Eoin: That
Luciano: could be another very similar use case and I
think you can very easily change our container
example to build something like that.
So I think this is a very good use case
and you can just summarize it as when there is
work to do and you need very specific
infrastructure for that work to happen,
you just define all of it, put the work as
a message in a queue and you know that it's
going to scale up when needed and scale to zero
when all the work has been completed.
So I think that's an excellent use case and I
can see ourselves as an AWS consulting company
using this kind of approach often enough because
we see that kind of problem happening in many
different ways very often.
Another thing we see a lot, especially with
financial services customers, is HPC,
high-performance computing.
And this is the case where, basically,
you need to have lots of compute,
but also lots of performance in terms of
networking and disk access.
So using something like ECS-MI can be a very
good option.
And we haven't done a lot of experimentation
yet,
But I think it's a very interesting feat,
at least on the paper.
So we want to test it more and see if
it's really something we can run in production
for this use case.
And in general, in our experience,
we could say that starting a single task took
three to four minutes for the use case we just
described.
So we didn't do a huge amount of testing with
many containers.
Generally, we were trying to run one instance
and one container.
But I think it would be really interesting to
see how much this scales and how fast.
Can you run thousands of containers?
And if it's possible and there is very little
overhead, then there are a lot of other
scenarios that are interesting and possibly even
competing with Lambda.
So I don't know.
I think we'll need to see what is the timing
there and the volumes that you can get to,
but definitely something worth experimenting
more because it might unlock a lot of other use
cases.
But I think that only tells you what you can
do with it.
I think that it's also interesting to see what
are some use cases that you should definitely
not use ECS-MI for.
Eoin: I don't think there are that many,
to be fair.
But one thing that's pointed out in the
documentation is around strong isolation.
Because Fargate, you may know that it uses these
really cool Firecracker VMs that offer very
strong guarantees around isolation.
With ECS-MI, you're still using EC2.
Tasks can be running on the same instance,
which means you don't have the same level of
guaranteed isolation and security.
You can configure ECS-MI to run tasks on
separate instances, but then you're kind of
losing the benefit of being able to pack
multiple containers on a shared instance for
cost and efficiency.
So security conscious workloads, take note of
that.
If you need a custom AMI, for whatever reason,
you have special managing security agents,
you can't use managed instances with a custom
AMI, that's the whole point, it's managed.
And I think lastly, if you want to shell into
the instance itself, you can't do that.
Just like Fargate, you can't shell into the
underlying instance.
You can ECS exec into the container itself,
but not into the host.
And that's it, really.
I think there isn't that long list of use cases
I wouldn't explore ECS-MI for.
I think it's quite broad in its applications.
It's probably time to wrap this up.
I think overall, we think this is a good
addition to the ECS suite.
Pricing might be a bit of a downer,
but that completely depends, as always.
So worth evaluating carefully.
The lack of support for spot instances,
I think was the biggest disappointment,
but we hope it's going to be there eventually.
The documentation and CDK support could be
better.
Lots more examples, again, something that we
hope will improve with time and more adoption.
We can see ourselves using ECS-MI in production.
So I think overall, we're pretty positive on it.
But if you've got any more thoughts on ECS-MI,
reach out to us and let us know in the
comments below or on social media.
All our links will be in the description.
Finally, I just want to thank 4theorem again for
powering this episode.
If you want help designing an AWS architecture
that's simple, scalable, and cost sane,
head to 4theorem.com.
Thank you.
We'll see you in the next one.